README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">
<img src="https://github.com/Skripkon/llm_trainer/blob/main/assets/llm_trainer_logo.png?raw=true" style="width: 800">
</h1>

# `llm_trainer` in 5 Lines of Code

```python
from llm_trainer import create_dataset, LLMTrainer

create_dataset(save_dir="data")   # Generate the default FineWeb dataset
model = ...                       # Define or load your model (GPT, xLSTM, Mamba...)
trainer = LLMTrainer(model)       # Initialize trainer with default settings
trainer.train(data_dir="data")    # Start training on the dataset
```

🔴 YouTube Video: [Train LLMs in code, spelled out](https://youtu.be/tFyDICExbHg)

> [!NOTE]
> Explore [usage examples](https://github.com/Skripkon/llm_trainer/blob/main/examples)

# Installation

```bash
pip install llm-trainer
```

# How to Prepare Data

1. Find a text corpus.
2. Tokenize the text.
3. Save the tokens as `.npy` files in a single folder (`your_data_directory`). You can save them as one file or multiple files.

   **Note:** The `.npy` format is the result of using `np.save(filename, tokens)`.

This process is handled by `llm_trainer.create_dataset()`, which currently supports only one dataset from Hugging Face:

```python
def create_dataset(save_dir: str = "data",    # where to save created dataset
                   dataset: str = Literal["fineweb-edu-10B"],
                   CHUNKS_LIMIT: int = 1_500, # maximum number of files (chunks) with tokens to create
                   CHUNK_SIZE=int(1e6))       # number of tokens per chunk
```

4. Pass the data directory path to `LLMTrainer.train(data_dir="your_data_directory")`.

# Which Models Are Valid?

You can use **ANY** LLM that expects a tensor `X` with shape `(batch_size, context_window)` as input and returns logits during the forward pass.

# How To Start Training?

You need to create an `LLMTrainer` object and call `.train()` on it. Read about its parameters below: 

### `LLMTrainer` Attributes

```python
model:        torch.nn.Module = None,                      # The neural network model to train  
optimizer:    torch.optim.Optimizer = None,                # Optimizer responsible for updating model weights  
scheduler:    torch.optim.lr_scheduler.LRScheduler = None, # Learning rate scheduler for dynamic adjustment
tokenizer:    tiktoken.Encoding = None                     # Tokenizer for generating text (used if verbose > 0 during training)
model_returns_logits: bool = False                         # Whether model(X) returns logits or an object with an attribute `logits`
```

You must specify only the `model`. The other attributes are optional and will be set to default values if not specified.

### `LLMTrainer` Parameters

| Parameter                 | Type               | Description                                                       | Default value           |
|---------------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| `max_steps`               | `int`              | The maximum number of training steps                              | **5,000**               |
| `save_each_n_steps`       | `int`              | The interval of steps at which to save model checkpoints          | **1,000**               |
| `print_logs_each_n_steps` | `int`              | The interval of steps at which to print training logs             | **1**                   |
| `BATCH_SIZE`              | `int`              | The total batch size for training                                 | **256**                 |
| `MINI_BATCH_SIZE`         | `int`              | The mini-batch size for gradient accumulation                     | **16**                  |
| `context_window`          | `int`              | The context window size for the data loader                       | **128**                 |
| `data_dir`                | `str`              | The directory containing the training data                        | **"data"**              |
| `logging_file`            | `Union[str, None]` | The file path for logging training metrics                        | **"logs_training.csv"** |
| `generate_each_n_steps`   | `int`              | The interval of steps at which to generate and print text samples | **200**                 |
| `prompt`                  | `str`              | Beginning of the sentence that the model will continue            | **"Once upon a time"**  |
| `save_dir`                | `str`              | The directory to save model checkpoints                           | **"checkpoints"**       |


Every parameter has a default value, so you can start training simply by calling `LLMTrainer.train()`.

Commit message:

📃 Set up linter, improve docs, add info about how to contribute, update dependencies

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">
<img src="https://github.com/Skripkon/llm_trainer/blob/main/assets/llm_trainer_logo.png?raw=true" style="width: 800">
</h1>

# `llm_trainer` in 5 Lines of Code

```python
from llm_trainer import create_dataset, LLMTrainer

create_dataset(save_dir="data")   # Generate the default FineWeb dataset
model = ...                       # Define or load your model (GPT, xLSTM, Mamba...)
trainer = LLMTrainer(model)       # Initialize trainer with default settings
trainer.train(data_dir="data")    # Start training on the dataset
```

🔴 YouTube Video: [Train LLMs in code, spelled out](https://youtu.be/tFyDICExbHg)

> [!NOTE]
> Explore [usage examples](https://github.com/Skripkon/llm_trainer/blob/main/examples)

# Installation

```bash
$ pip install llm-trainer
```

# How to Prepare Data

1. Find a text corpus.
2. Tokenize the text.
3. Save the tokens as `.npy` files in a single folder (`your_data_directory`). You can save them as one file or multiple files.

   **Note:** The `.npy` format is the result of using `np.save(filename, tokens)`.

This process is handled by `llm_trainer.create_dataset()`, which currently supports only one dataset from Hugging Face:

```python
def create_dataset(save_dir: str = "data",    # where to save created dataset
                   dataset: str = Literal["fineweb-edu-10B"],
                   CHUNKS_LIMIT: int = 1_500, # maximum number of files (chunks) with tokens to create
                   CHUNK_SIZE=int(1e6))       # number of tokens per chunk
```

4. Pass the data directory path to `LLMTrainer.train(data_dir="your_data_directory")`.

# Which Models Are Valid?

You can use **ANY** LLM that expects a tensor `X` with shape `(batch_size, context_window)` as input and returns logits during the forward pass.

# How To Start Training?

You need to create an `LLMTrainer` object and call `.train()` on it. Read about its parameters below: 

### `LLMTrainer` Attributes

```python
model:        torch.nn.Module = None,                      # The neural network model to train  
optimizer:    torch.optim.Optimizer = None,                # Optimizer responsible for updating model weights  
scheduler:    torch.optim.lr_scheduler.LRScheduler = None, # Learning rate scheduler for dynamic adjustment
tokenizer:    tiktoken.Encoding = None                     # Tokenizer for generating text (used if verbose > 0 during training)
model_returns_logits: bool = False                         # Whether model(X) returns logits or an object with an attribute `logits`
```

You must specify only the `model`. The other attributes are optional and will be set to default values if not specified.

### `LLMTrainer` Parameters

| Parameter                 | Type               | Description                                                       | Default value           |
|---------------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| `max_steps`               | `int`              | The maximum number of training steps                              | **5,000**               |
| `save_each_n_steps`       | `int`              | The interval of steps at which to save model checkpoints          | **1,000**               |
| `print_logs_each_n_steps` | `int`              | The interval of steps at which to print training logs             | **1**                   |
| `BATCH_SIZE`              | `int`              | The total batch size for training                                 | **256**                 |
| `MINI_BATCH_SIZE`         | `int`              | The mini-batch size for gradient accumulation                     | **16**                  |
| `context_window`          | `int`              | The context window size for the data loader                       | **128**                 |
| `data_dir`                | `str`              | The directory containing the training data                        | **"data"**              |
| `logging_file`            | `Union[str, None]` | The file path for logging training metrics                        | **"logs_training.csv"** |
| `generate_each_n_steps`   | `int`              | The interval of steps at which to generate and print text samples | **200**                 |
| `prompt`                  | `str`              | Beginning of the sentence that the model will continue            | **"Once upon a time"**  |
| `save_dir`                | `str`              | The directory to save model checkpoints                           | **"checkpoints"**       |


Every parameter has a default value, so you can start training simply by calling `LLMTrainer.train()`.

# To contribute

1. Fork the repository.
2. Make changes.
3. Apply linter.
```
$ pip install pylint==3.3.5
$ pylint $(git ls-files '*.py')
```
4. Commit and push your changes.
5. Create a pull request from your fork to the main repository.
